社会主义是一套经济体系和政治理论，解释颇多。一种解释是主张或提倡公共或是整个The society as a whole owns and controls means of production (products, capital, land, assets, etc.), and its management and distribution are based on the public interest. It advocates for collective or government ownership and management of production tools, as well as the distribution of goods. The Frankfurt Declaration of the Socialist Party International also states that "under this system, public interests take priority over private profits. The current economic goals of socialist policies are full employment, increased production, improved living standards, social security, and the promotion of reasonable distribution of income and property.
Socialism is divided into many schools, from establishing cooperative economic management structures to abolishing hierarchical systems and even free association. In fact, it is not possible to simply include all schools of thought with a single definition. The differences between each school lie in the form of social co ownership that should be established, including labor cooperation, public ownership, state-owned or national ownership, the proportion between market economy and planned economy, how production units should manage organizations, and the role of the state in society. In general, a socialist system should include a system of collection, production, and distribution, directly used to meet economic and human needs. The purpose of goods and services should be for direct use rather than for private interests arising from the need for capital accumulation. Accounting should not be based on financial aspects, but rather on a universal physical labor indicator or directly based on labor hours.
As a political movement, the political philosophy of socialism is distributed from reformism to Revolutionary Socialism. National socialism advocates promoting comprehensive nationalization of production, distribution, and exchange to achieve socialism; Liberal socialism advocates for workers' traditional control of production methods and opposes state power for management; Democratic socialism seeks to establish socialism through the process of democratization.
The modern socialist theory began with a political movement initiated by intellectuals and the working class in the 18th century to criticize the impact of industrialization and private property on society. Early Utopian socialism, such as Robert Owen, tried to establish a commune that was self-sufficient and separated from capitalist society; Claude Onlie Saint Simon, on the other hand, coined the term socialisme, advocating for the application of technocrats and planned industries. Marx and Engels jointly designed and created an ideal social system, which allowed the extensive application of modern science and technology to rationalize economic activities by removing anarchism and capitalist production that led to unqualified and cyclical overcapacity. In the early 19th century, socialism only expressed concern for social issues; By the end of the 19th century, socialism had become the driving force behind the establishment of a new system based on social commons and stood on the opposite side of capitalism.